Hey, so welcome to Using TakeDamage() on Actors! In this video what we're
going to do is starting to take damage. So if we look at this tank
and we see that in the inspector we now have  a current health value that we can read but not change,
and every time we get hit it goes down 20 and eventually our tank can report as
dead. So let's get it done!
So I want to start by making a couple of tweaks to this projectile.
I want to get rid of that brown ball, it seems to have crept back in for me, and that's probably
because I have, at some point, on the Collision
Mesh part of the Projectile Blueprint gone in and made it
invisible but perhaps not saved my blueprint. The other thing I want to do
is increase the Radius of my ExplosionForce, I'm going to do that up to 10 meters,
1,000 centimeters, simply because it's quite hard to
actually make the other enemy tank appear to be hit. So let's just try that with a 10
meter explosion radius. That's good, that's easier to hit him now.
So you can constantly, as you go through the development of your game, of course, tweak these parameters as soon as you
find out that they're not how you want them and make them better.
OK so now on to the issue at hand, which is that when we hit the enemy tank,
another thing that we want to do is we want to actually go in and
apply some damage to him. Just before we set the timer, I would have thought the timer
ought to be the last thing we do, the DestroyTimer, just because it feels like we've
finished with the hit then, but just before that we want to damage the enemy tanks.
So I'm going to start this off, get you going with how to use the Unreal Actor Damage System,
and then, you can go ahead and finish the damage system on the tank side. So
what we can do from here is, we can use something called UGameplayStatics and there's a
method on UGameplayStatics called ApplyRadialDamage()
and that goes very nicely with our ExplosionForce,
that we're already using that is radial. So let's go ahead and open up that method.
Great! So what is in need? Well it's going to need a few things. It's going to need a
reference to the context that we're going to apply the
damage from, which is this projectile right here. We need a BaseDamage
and amount, so on the Projectile I'm going to make ourselves a DamageAmount.
So I'm going to put it here, I'm going to make it a UPROPERTY.
I'm going to make it EditDefaultsOnly(). I'm going to make it
Category =. What shall we have? Components firing
Setup? I think it's still the "Setup".
And then, the deal is that it's going to be a float, which is talking about the
ProjectileDamage. That says set an amount of
damage that this projectile does. Whether it should be a float or an integer is for
discussion, in a way, but if we look over here in the signature of this
method and what it's expecting, it is expecting a float.
So as soon as VisualStudio catches up with me, we'll see that it wants a float,
so let's give it a float. We'll talk about floats and ints and damage and actually getting
to 0 damage, when we get to the other side, in fact, in the solution to the challenge.
So it wants a float, we're giving it a float, let's call it ProjectileDamage.
There we go and that is editable! It then wants an origin of this damage.
Well we just get the ActorLocation. We are already in
the Projectile, which is the Actor in question, that is where the damage is going to start from.
Now the DamageRadius, what we can do here is we can look
through the ExplosionForce to its Radius and just use that,
then we have bound these together for consistency.
Yeah that's pretty handy, if I spelled consistency right, it doesn't really
matter if I haven't. But the idea is that if we change the ExplosionForce in the blueprint, then this
will come through here. That's pretty handy right?! Now we need to give it a UDamageType.
That's the next thing, so let's do that. UDamageType::,
and we're going to use StaticClass() here. If you want to find out more about that,
go to the documentation and read about the
ApplyRadialDamage() method, which we can lookup as follows. I'll put this in the resource
for you as well. UGameplayStatics::ApplyRadialDamage.
There you go! It's giving you all sorts, a big ugly signature, and down here it gives you some
more information about what each of these mean. OK.
I'm just giving you the solution, if you like, on this side, and your challenge will be on the other
side. This is how we apply the damage in the first place. Then, it wants an array of
Actors that are going to receive the damage. Well we want an Array of
AActor pointers, like so, but we're going to give it
an empty array, i.e. we're going to ignore...
Or damage all actors is easier. "// damage all actors".
OK. So that's what we do on this side, and then, all actors,
that are within that radius, are going to receive an amount of damage
that's determined by the ProjectileDamage. So that's one half
of this done. Then, what we need to do is flip our attention over to the
tank, and yes, we're actually going to use the tank. The tank is
not a completely and utterly thin and useless class. Now because
the tank is an Actor there is a method that will be called on the tank automatically,
if it's in that radius, and that method is this AActor::
TakeDamage method and there is the signature for you. And what I want you to do is take on the challenge of trying to implement TankDamage.
So take a look at that AActor::TakeDamage method, as linked in the resources or
just Google search for it. Override the method, the tank's
virtual.. It's a virtual method, we've done this before, virtual void override, all that sort of stuff. Although it's not
void actually, so it's virtual float override, [Laughs] in this case. Clamp the
DamageToApply to the CurrentHealth. So inside we'll have something like Damage
ToApply =, you know, the damage that comes in, which is
called DamageAmount, as you can see in the signature, and we want to clamp that to the Current
Health. So say the tank had, as I said before, 17,
let's say, points of health left, and the damage we want to
try and apply is 20, we actually only want to take 17 points. We want to have health
end up at 0, precisely. But all you need to do for this lecture is log the
DamageAmount and the DamageToApply. So it's really about just overriding that method
and doing a clamp, and then, log these
values out to make sure that the DamageAmount and the DamageToApply look like they're right.
You can tweak the starting values, if you need to check the clamp, and then, either carry on watching
this video or if you, or if you feel confident and this challenge is too small for your level
of experience, then just carry on and finish the entire damage system,
without the UI. I'll be covering the UI of the damage in the next video.
But go ahead, pause the video, and take on the challenge now!
OK cool! So let's go and have a little look at how this is going to work. So on
the tank we are going to need a few new things. Firstly, we're going to need
this method. So here it is! Here is the
signature of it, virtual float TakeDamage. So what we do, as we
know, is firstly decide whether it's public or private. Well it actually needs to be public, if you think about it,
because other classes need to be able to call this. So TakeDamage,
now this leaves the responsibility for taking the damage in the hands of the tank, which is fine.
It doesn't have to TakeDamage, but it
can decide whether it's going to TakeDamage. But this method will get called by the
engine, when something like the projectile is in range
and says that damage should be taken. So all I'm doing here is stripping the white space on
this guy, popping an override on the end of it,
and that's it really. So I've literally just copied that from the documentation.
So we have that public method there, and I think I'm going to put a comment to say
"// called by the engine when actor
damage is dealt". OK fantastic! So
I've got the signature, let's go ahead and just do the implementation of that now. We don't
want the word virtual, it's a float. We'll need to take not of that in a minute, that
we have to return something. We have to put the class name in, we strip an
override off the edge, and switch into curlies. OK,
so that is the beginnings of things. Now, we need to return
something. This wants us to return the amount of damage that was taken, and in the challenge
slide, I said we should call that DamageToApply. So let's return DamageToApply,
and let's also immediately calculate DamageToApply. So
use auto for now and DamageToApply,
and then, we're going to use the clamp, FMath::Clamp().
And what we're going to clamp is the damage that comes
in here, which is the DamageAmount, and we're going to clamp
it between 0 and the current health
of the tank. Now we don't have a CurrentHealth, so let's go and give ourselves a property
in the tank, down here in the private section.
Because it's a variable we want to keep it nice and private, private:
CurrentHealth. Now, what is the value of CurrentHealth. I'm actually going to specify
health in integers. I'm going to go straight to that, because we don't want to be dealing with
comparing floats to 0's. Remember we've talked about this before, so I'm
going to do the following. I'm going to say we have two int32's, one as the StartingHealth,
and I'm going to give it a sensible default value of 100, like
that. And then, I'm going to make a CurrentHealth and I'm going to say that that's the Starting
Health. And we can do that in the header file here, because we know
the compiler knows the StartingHealth, so therefore it can know the CurrentHealth. Now,
while I'm at it, let's make these things UPROPERTY(). And this guy, the Starting
Health is going to be (EditDefaults
Only, and the category is going to be "Setup"),
string referenced. OK, then the
CurrentHealth, well it's going to be
a UPROPERTY, it's going to be (Visible
Anywhere, because we don't want to be changing it, it only wants to be changed in code.
And Category = I'm going to say "Health").
OK, so hopefully it's clear what we're doing there. We have a Starting
Health and a CurrentHealth, which means that over here we can clamp
the DamageToApply, somewhere between
0 and the CurrentHealth, but we don't want to
ever be comparing floats to 0. So what I'm going to do is, I'm
going to start off by saying, actually let's introduce a
concept and be explicit about the type. Now we want an integer concept of Damage
Points, which are going to be an integer, they're a number, and then, what I'm going
to do is, I'm going to use FPlatformMath.
It has a method in it called RoundTo
Int(), and we're going to take the floating point DamageAmount
that comes in, we've got no control over that it has to be a floating point, and we're going to
round this DamageAmount that comes in into DamagePoints.
And then, when we talk about the amount of damage that we're going to apply, we're going to actually
use these DamagePoints, and then, the auto here should come out as
an int32. In fact, I'm even just going to be explicit about that. So I'm
saying, let's convert floating point damage to integer damage. Let's
round the damage to the nearest integer, and then, decide on what the
damage to apply is, as an integer, somewhere between 0 and the current health. And remember that
it's all in integers, the CurrentHealth and the StartingHealth. Hopefully that makes sense. If
we do that, then life is going to be a lot easier, because we can say
for sure that the tank has exactly 0 health. So we're nearly there with the challenge.
Now all I want to do is Log Warning in TEXT,
and I'm just going to say tank or just say
the two things I wanted you to log out, which are the DamageAmount and the DamageToApply. OK,
so ("DamageAmount=%f,
DamageToApply =
another %f), and then, we literally just lay
those out. In fact, because I've named them precisely what they are, I
can just copy and paste there, and we're good to go! And we
have to return a DamageAmount. So hopefully this makes sense, let's see if it works!
I'll show you the source control, while we
go. So this is my declaration!
In fact, it's missed something there, and that's because I'm showing you the wrong
file. There you go! This is what we've done in the Tank
header file and this is what we've done in the Tank C++ file. I'm not going to
show you the full lines there, they're very long, but there you go. OK, but hopefully
the compile has happened by now. Let's see if it's complete!
1901 p.m., which is is in my local time.
So that is, by the way, a way you can tell whether that has worked. Now let's
see if the log... I need the Output Log available and right down at the bottom. In fact, I'll clear it. Let's just
see what happens! So we're not
actually subtracting these things right now.
DamageAmount 0, DamageToApply 0.
OK so that's just probably because in the projectile header file,
where we had ProjectileDamage, we never actually gave that a sensible default, and this is the importance
of giving it a sensible default. So ProjectileDamage = 20f. Let's recompile!
And when we recompile, why don't we just go ahead and have a look
at the Projectile and make sure... Well let's just see where this is going to
be. It should be on the projectile, we should have (EditDefaultsOnly). Yep! So let's
make sure that, on the projectile, when we find the damage that this actually comes in as 20.
Now it hasn't there. What's the problem? It's probably something simple like
the f suffix on Projectile.h. So that's because I've said
20f without a 20 decimal. So I need to put the decimal
in there. OK let's just recompile. And what we're hoping will happen here, on the
Projectile Blueprint, is that you will see here it jumped from a default of
0, which is why 0 damage was being dealt, which is the default if you don't specify
a value up to 20, which it has there. Now the designer can take it from there and improve the values.
So let's see if this is doing what we want!
It's going to go F8, into the output log.
Yeah! So we're getting a DamageAmount of 20
coming through, so the message is being called, which is good news, but the DamageToApply is coming
out as clamped to 0. So what is wrong with the way we're doing DamageTo
Apply? And, in this case, it's not because there's a problem with the value, actually, it's because I'm
using the wrong format operator. It should be %i for integers, and
you will not show a floating point properly, it will not make the conversion
for us. So we have to be very explicit about what types we are expecting
here. So we're saying, DamageAmount=%f, DamageToApply=%i.
I wanted to show you that, because you can believe what you see in the logs sometimes, but, actually,
what you're seeing in the logs is wrong. I should see 20 for both values here, because there is
no clamping to be done. That's good! So we have the fundamentals of
the damage system in place now, which is great news! To finish
that damage system off all we have to do is, when we
get this damage, we simply have to say that the CurrentHealth
-= DamageToApply, like so.
And then, what I'm finally going to do is just use this log entry to say
if the (CurrentHealth) is lower than 0
or less than or equal to 0, not that it should ever get there,
then we're going to log out that the tank is dead. So instead of all
that stuff, I'm just going to simply say tank died. We could say
which tank, if we wanted, by getting names and things, but for now, this is perfectly OK.
And that's it, this is a very simple and very
standard damage piece of code. So let's just
make sure that that works, by compiling, and we'll play the game, we'll
inspect my tank. On my tank we should be able to see the CurrentHealth value
decrease from 100 down to 0, and eventually we should get a log entry to say
that my tank is dead. So I'm going to F8 to depossess, inspect my
tank, go to the Details, then have a look at the tank, and find the Current Health.
If you see 80 there, that's looking good! Sixty as it gets hit again!
Forty as it gets hit again! Twenty as it gets hit again!
It missed that time, hit me the final time,
and tank died, and when tank dies, we need to do some other things, which we'll
cover in the next lecture!